# Introduction to Quantum computing
With the recent advancements in Quantum computing, I think it's about time that I write something about the subject.  
I am quite hesitant - this is not my area of expertise, so if I write something incorrect here - please message me and I will correct it.  
My goal in this blogpost series is to get to the major Quantum computing algorithms - [Grover's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grover%27s_algorithm) and [Shor's algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shor%27s_algorithm), while completely skipping the physical parts - which I know even less about.  
I will warn that there is some mathematical background necessary - particularly [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear_algebra](Linear algebra) and [complex numbers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complex_number) - but I will try to explain what I can.

## Background
Apparently, on the smallest scales, the world behaves very different than what we're used to. This part is extremely hard to accept as it's substantially different from our day-to-day experiences, and while (in my opinion) we still do not know what *truly* happens at those scales - we have good mathematical models for those behaviors.  
Interestingly, those behaviors and\or the mathematical model could be used for actual computation that would have certain advantages to classical computing.  
Instead of rambling on - let me write out those behaviors:
1. Quantum particles (e.g. [Photons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Photon), [Electrons](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Electron) and so on) have certain properties that do not have definite values before measurements. Some of those properties could be the particle's position, [momentum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Momentum), [spin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spin_(physics)) (intrinsic [angular momentum](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angular_momentum)) and so on. We say that those properties are in a **[superposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Superposition_principle)** - not because of lack of information about the property, but because that's how nature works. For example, a particle's [spin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spin_(physics)) can be measured as "up" or "down", but is normally in a superposition of "up" and "down" - kind of a "mix" of them. We mark that as $|\varphi> = a|\uparrow >+b|\downarrow >$ - and we say that the spin of the particle has a coefficient of "a" in the "up" state, and a coefficient of "b" to be in the "down" state.
2. Measuring a particle "collapses" the property into a base state - randomly (but not uniformly). For example, in the spin example, we asserted $|\varphi> = a|\uparrow >+b|\downarrow >$. If we measure the spin - it would collapse into the state $\uparrow >$ with a probability of $a^2$, and collapse into the state $\downarrow >$ with a probability of $b^2$. This rule is known as [the Born rule](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Born_rule), and dictates a strong assumption on the coefficients - **their values squared must sum up to 1**, since they are probabiliies. In mathematical notation: $a^2 + b^2 = 1$, and generally for $n$ coefficients that I will be marking as $c_i$: $\sum_{i=1}^{n}c_i^2 = 1$. Note that **we do not control the result** - nature decides on its own based on the coefficients and the Born rule. Note that after a measurement, follow-up measurements result in the same value always - that's why we call this phenomenon a "collapse". I do not want to get into the engineering or physics aspects, but maintaining quantum particles in superpositions without making the collapse due to unintentional measurements (I will keep the definition of a measurement vague here on purpose) - is the main engineering challenge in Quantum computing these days.
3. The coefficients in superposition could be negative or even complex numbers - as long as their sum of squares is exactly 1. This might look weird or useless, but that's the source of Quantum computing's power.
4. We can manipulate the superposition coefficients without measuring them. This is done via something called "Quantum gates" (the analogue of traditional [logic gates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logic_gate)), and is mathematically done by multiplying the algebric representation of the quantum state with a [Unitary matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unitary_matrix). More on that later. A measurement, by the way - is mathematically a multiplication of the state by a **non-*Unitary-matrix**. We'll see that later too.
5. Quantum entanglement - we can have two (or more) particles with a **joint state**. When I say a "joint state" I mean that you cannot think as the state of a single particle anymore - the states are "correlated" in some sense. That also means that measuring one particle *immediately* affects the other, i.e. the joint state of these particles collapses together. This also means manipiulating the state (as we discussed) - manipulates the states of both particles at the same time.

As you can see, these are a lot of assumptions - and they also imply many limitations on Quantum computers - unlike popular descriptions of Quantum computing - you cannot simply "evaluate all states in parallel" and return the correct one. Instead, one has to delicately assign "favorable" coefficients to quantum states and eventually perform a measurement that would give a significant probability to the "correct" outcome, and then check if we got the desired solution.

## Qubits
Just like regular [bits](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bit) we have on a classic computer - we have the Quantum computing equivalent called "Qubits". Clasical bits are either 0 or 1, and are implemented using voltage (high voltage above a certain threshold represents a digital 1, low voltage represents a 0).  
Qubits also have 0 and 1 equivalents - for example, a spin of a particle can be used for that: spin down could represent a 0 and spin up could represent a 1 - which we will represent as $|0>$ and $|1>$. Since we have a superposition - a Qubit would have coefficients to those base states: $a|0> + b|1>$. Let us also remember that $a$ and $b$ can be complex numbers, and their sum of squares must add up to 1: $a^2 + b^2 = 1$. Sometimes you might see those coefficients described as **probability amplitudes** - for all means and purposes - it's just a name we give them.  
I will avoid the question of how those states are actually implemented - spin is not the only way to do so - and treat it as a "black-box", just like one doesn't necessarily need to know how classical bits are implemented.  
